rape is the cheapest and possibly the
oldest weapon of War it's also the least
condemned and most silenced War crime
it's against that backdrop that Israeli
rights groups are trying to raise
awareness about reports of sexual
violence committed by Hamas militants
during the October 7th attack this week
protesters demonstrated outside the UN
office in Jerusalem calling on it to
address the issue of violence against
women by Hamas some Israeli activists
say the un is downplaying the issue the
UN says it has requested access to
collect information about the attacks
but it has not received a response from
Israel Christina Lamb is Chief
correspondent for the Sunday Times and
she's also the author of the book our
bodies their Battlefield in which she
Chronicles the lives of women in Wartime
and how sexual violence against them is
used as a weapon Christina so good to
see you again you're in Israel at the
moment what what have you heard about
the sexual violence perpetrated by Hamas
on and after October
7th so I've spoken to a number of
women's
organizations uh and police and others
who all say that they have a body of
evidence from people largely at the
Music Festival on October the 7th um
eyewitnesses
of women young women being brutally
raped gang raped um at the festival and
a lot of other atrocities against
women how does that compare to what
you've been able to document in other
attacks and
conflicts so I mean the problem here at
the moment that is that there no
survivors have actually come forward so
this is all um information coming either
from people who are like First
Responders or people who were hiding
that day and say that they saw things or
also videos that Hamas themselves put
out at the time as we know they were
kind of live streaming some of the
atrocities and also from interrogations
from Hamas fighter who have been called
so that you know there is quite a a a
body of evidence um suggesting that this
you know happened um um was
systematic uh it unfortunately is
something that we see in every conflict
there has been widespread criticism of
international women's organizations and
the UN not responding appropriately to
the acts of sexual violence perpet ated
on October 7th there have been protests
and hashtags like me too unless you're a
Jew have been trending why the silence
you
think I think part of it is that we
haven't actually had any survivors come
forward and there you know let's be
honest there's been a lot of propaganda
in this conflict generally so uh you
know um there's been a tendency to to
doubt a lot of things because quite
often things were told at the beginning
turn out not to be true um but so that's
one of the reasons that I came here to
actually you know go and talk to people
and try and find out for myself as much
as you can what's really happening and
certainly you know there are people that
were collecting the the bodies and body
remains talk about you know clear
evidence forensic evidence that women
were raped and bruly raped before they
were killed I mean in some cases you
know so violently that their pelvic
bones were broken um so there's a lot of
anger here among women's groups that
this isn't being taken seriously they
think in uh the International Community
and the different standard
s are being
applied um I mean one thing I would say
is
usually because they're saying that
there the International Community puts
out statements very quickly about this
in other places I'm not sure that that
people in Ethiopia for example would
agree women there were you know
complaining for months that this was
happening before anybody said anything
if you look at DRC I think the figure is
say something like
60,000 women have been raped this year
so and nobody's really talking about
that so you could argue that you know um
this is an issue that doesn't get enough
attention generally it's not something
specific to to Israel but it you know it
is the case that un women in particular
have not put out a state they could put
out a statement for example
expressing their concern at the reports
that that doesn't commit them to
anything yeah rights groups have been
calling for the ICC to investigate the
acts of gender based and sexual violence
as a crime against humanity now
considering everything that you just
laid out and that the IC has prosecuted
only two cases of rape in over 20 years
you know a scenario as chaotic as the
October 7th attack no survivors who have
identified themselves as victims
how hard will it be to establish some
sort of
accountability well first of all ISRO
isn't a member of the IC so that rather
complicates things but um and as you
point out the IC does not have a great
record on this it has an appalling
record although the um current chief
prosecutor Kar K when he was elected
last year one of his pledges was
precisely to do something on this issu
so here is um a good
example um but you know it is very
difficult generally to collect evidence
on this but there is uh there's two
things going on here the police have
launched a big investigation and massing
evidence and there's also a civilian
commission and and both of these I mean
it shouldn't be the case that you do
actually have to have the women
themselves come forward in in order to
believe it because this is something
often very difficult for people to talk
about you know it's the one crime where
the victim is often made to feel that
they did something wrong sadly you've
also tried to find an answer to why this
keeps happening have you found an
answer I mean it seems clear to me that
it's happening more and more and I think
one of the reasons the failure of the
International Community there is
complete impunity sadly rape is a very
effective weapon if you want to
humiliate your enemy or terrorize them
or drive them out of an area and at the
moment no one's paying a price for that
because almost nobody is brought to
Justice interestingly I mean the one
sort of bright spot in in all of this in
terms of getting Justice is the use of
universal jurisdiction which means that
any country can prosecute somebody for a
war crime anywhere it doesn't have to be
in the country where it happened and
Germany is actually Pioneer in this
because Germany has now um convicted
Iraqi man for taking a idi um mother and
child and the child actually um was
chained up outside and died of thirst
that's the first conviction um for what
happened to the ucds so that is
something a model that other countries
could be
using those was author and reporter
Christina Lamb Chief correspondent for
the Sunday Times I highly recommend you
read her book our bodies their
Battlefield thank you so much for your
time